# About Zonedstorage.io

As a natural extension to Western Digital's ongoing contributions
to various open source projects and standard organizations, and its
long history of making its ZBC/ZAC tools available to the
open-source community, the company has launched ZonedStorage.io as
part of its [Zoned Storage Initiative]
(https://www.westerndigital.com/company/innovations/zoned-storage/)
ZonedStorage.io is aimed to document support for zoned storage
devices available through various open source projects to
jump-start application development initiatives within the developer
community as well as help data center infrastructure engineers take
advantage of zoned storage technologies. This site hosts
information about software development libraries, tools, standards
information and software resources that provide a unified framework
to manage SSDs with ZNS support and capacity-optimized ZBC/ZAC
HDDs. Through this open-source initiative, developers can gain
confidence in the burgeoning ecosystem of community and industry
contributors and supporters.

# About Western Digital

Western Digital creates environments for data to thrive. The
company is driving the innovation needed to help customers capture,
preserve, access and transform an ever-increasing diversity of
data. Everywhere data lives, from advanced data centers to mobile
sensors to personal devices, our industry-leading solutions deliver
the possibilities of data. Western Digital data-centric solutions
are marketed under the Western Digital, G-Technology, SanDisk, and
WD brands.

Please visit [WesternDigital.com](https://www.westerndigital.com) for
more information.
